    THE GAZETTE OF THE DEMOCRATIC
         SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF
              SRI LANKA
                     Part II of September 15, 2023

                                SUPPLEMENT

                            (Issued on 18.09.2023)




                             ONLINE SAFETY
                                            A

                                        BILL
to establish the Online Safety Commission; to make provisions to prohibit
online communication of certain statements of fact in Sri Lanka; to prevent
the use of online accounts and inauthentic online accounts for prohibited
purposes; to make provisions to identify and declare online locations used
for prohibited purposes in Sri Lanka; to suppress the financing and other
support of communication of false statements of fact and for matters
                 connected therewith or incidental thereto

         Ordered to be Published by the Minister of Public Security

                PRINTED AT THE DEPARTMENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, SRI LANKA
             TO BE PURCHASED AT THE GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS BUREAU, COLOMBO 5

Price : Rs. 84.00                                                   Postage : Rs. 150.00


This Gazette Supplement can be downloaded from www.documents.gov.lk
                            Online Safety                         1


     L.D.-O 34/2021

     AN ACT TO ESTABLISH THE ONLINE SAFETY COMMISSION; TO MAKE
       PROVISIONS TO PROHIBIT ONLINE COMMUNICATION OF CERTAIN
       STATEMENTS OF FACT IN SRI LANKA; TO PREVENT THE USE OF ONLINE
       ACCOUNTS AND INAUTHENTIC ONLINE ACCOUNTS FOR PROHIBITED
       PURPOSES; TO MAKE PROVISIONS TO IDENTIFY AND DECLARE ONLINE
       LOCATIONS USED FOR PROHIBITED PURPOSES IN     SRI LANKA; TO
       SUPPRESS THE FINANCING AND OTHER SUPPORT OF COMMUNICATION
       OF FALSE STATEMENTS OF FACT AND FOR MATTERS CONNECTED
       THEREWITH OR INCIDENTAL THERETO.


     BE it enacted by the Parliament of the Democratic Socialist
     Republic of Sri Lanka as follows: -

        1. This Act may be cited as the Online Safety Act No.          Short title
     of 2023.

 5     2. The provisions of this Act shall apply where –               Application
                                                                       of the Act

        (a) a person commits an offence under this Act in
            respect of a citizen of Sri Lanka, while being present
            in Sri Lanka or outside Sri Lanka;

        (b) a loss or damage is caused within or outside
10          Sri Lanka by the commission of an offence under
            this Act, to the State or to a person resident in
            Sri Lanka; or

         (c) an offence under this Act, wherever committed, is
             committed by a person who is a citizen of Sri Lanka.

15     3. The objectives of this Act shall be-                         Objectives of
                                                                       the Act

        (a) to protect persons against damage caused by
            communication of false statements or threatening,
            alarming or distressing statements;
     2                      Online Safety


         (b) to ensure protection from communication of
             statements in contempt of court or prejudicial to
             the maintenance of the authority and impartiality
             of the judiciary;

 5       (c) to introduce measures to detect, prevent and
             safeguard against the misuses of online accounts
             and bots to commit offences under this Act; and

         (d) to prevent the financing, promotion and other
             support of online locations which repeatedly
10           communicate false statements of fact in Sri Lanka.

                               PART I

            ESTABLISHMENT OF THE ONLINE SAFETY COMMISSION

      4. (1) There shall be established a Commission, which          Establishment
                                                                     of the Online
   shall be called the Online Safety Commission (hereinafter         Safety
15 referred to as the “Commission”).                                 Commission


        (2) The Commission shall, by the name assigned to it by
     subsection (1), be a body corporate with perpetual succession
     and a common seal, and may sue and be sued in such name.

      (3) The Commission shall exercise and perform the powers
20 and functions assigned to it under this Act for the purpose of
   achieving the objectives of this Act.

      5. Subject to the provisions of section 6, the Commission      Members of
                                                                     the
   shall consist of five members appointed by the President
                                                                     Commission
   having qualifications and experience in one or more of the
25 fields of information technology, law, governance, social
   services, journalism, science and technology or management.
                            Online Safety                       3


        6. A person shall be disqualified from being appointed       Disqualification
     or continuing as a member of the Commission if such person-     for being
                                                                     appointed as
                                                                     a member
        (a) is elected or appointed as a Member of Parliament,
            a Member of a Provincial Council or a Member of a
5           local authority;

        (b) is not or ceases to be a citizen of Sri Lanka;

         (c) directly or indirectly holds or enjoys an entitlement
             or benefit under an agreement entered by or on
             behalf of the Commission;

10      (d) has any financial or other interest that may adversely
            impact the implementation of the functions as a
            member of the Commission;

         (e) absents himself from attending three consecutive
             meetings of the Commission, without a valid reason;

15       (f) has been discovered or declared as a person of
             unsound mind under any law effective in Sri Lanka
             or in any other country;

        (g) a person who, having been declared an insolvent or
            a bankrupt under any law in Sri Lanka or in any
20          other country, is an undischarged insolvent or
            bankrupt; or

        (h) has been sentenced or received an order for a term
            of imprisonment imposed by any court in Sri Lanka
            or in any other country.

25      7. (1) A member of the Commission may resign from office     Resignation,
     by letter in that behalf addressed to the President, and such   removal and
                                                                     term of
     resignation shall take effect from the date on which the        office of
     resignation is accepted in writing by the President.            members of
                                                                     the
                                                                     Commission
     4                     Online Safety


       (2) The President may, for reasons assigned, remove a
     member of the Commission from his office.

        (3) The term of office of a member of the Commission
     shall be three years from the date of appointment.

 5    (4) Where a member of the Commission vacates office
   by death, resignation or other cause, the President shall
   appoint, having regard to the provisions of sections 5 and 6,
   another eligible person in such members’ place, and the
   person so appointed shall hold office for the unexpired period
10 of the term of office of the member whom such person
   succeeds.

      (5) A member of the Commission whose term of office is
   due to end otherwise than by removal, shall be eligible for
   reappointment for not more than one further term of office,
15 whether consecutive or otherwise.

        (6) Members of the Commission shall be paid such
     remuneration as may be determined by a resolution of
     Parliament and such remuneration shall be charged to the
     Fund of the Commission.

20      8. (1) The President shall appoint one of the members of    Chairman of
     the Commission to be the Chairman of the Commission            the
                                                                    Commission
     (hereinafter referred to as the “Chairman”).

      (2) The Chairman may resign from the office of Chairman
   by letter in that behalf addressed to the President and the
25 resignation shall take effect from the date on which it is
   accepted, in writing, by the President.

        (3) The Chairman shall cease to be the Chairman, if
     disqualified to be a member of the Commission in terms of
     section 6.
                             Online Safety                        5


        (4) The term of office of the Chairman shall be three years.

       (5) The Chairman shall not, on vacation of the office of
     Chairman, be eligible for reappointment as Chairman.

     (6) Without prejudice to the provisions of this section,
5 the Chairman shall, within one month of being appointed as
  the Chairman, nominate a member in writing, to be the
  Deputy Chairman to discharge the functions of the Chairman
  during his absence from office due to illness or any other
  cause.

10     9. (1) The Chairman shall summon all meetings of the            Meetings of
     Commission. Any member of the Commission may, by                  the
                                                                       Commission
     written notice, request the Chairman to call a meeting of the
     Commission and the Chairman shall not otherwise than for
     good reason, refuse to do so.

15      (2) The Commission may decide any matter, which is
     determined by the Chairman to be urgent with the agreement
     of the majority of the members.

     (3) The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the
   Commission and in the absence of the Chairman at any
20 meeting, the Deputy Chairman shall preside at such meeting.

        (4) The quorum for a meeting of the Commission shall be
     three members including the Chairman. In the absence of
     the Chairman, the quorum shall be three members including
     the Deputy Chairman.

25    (5) All matters for decision by the Commission shall be
   decided by a majority of the votes of the members of the
   Commission. The decision supported by the votes of a
   majority of the members of the Commission on any matter
   shall be deemed to be the decision of the Commission on
30 that matter.
     6                      Online Safety


        (6) All decisions of the Commission, supported by
     reasons, shall be in writing and the seal of the Commission
     affixed thereto in accordance with paragraph (c) of section
     10.

5       (7) In case there is an equality of votes on any matter to
     be decided by the Commission, the Chairman shall have a
     casting vote.

      (8) Subject to the preceding provisions of this section,
   the Commission may regulate the procedure in regard to the
10 meetings of the Commission and the transaction of business
   at such meetings.

      (9) No act, decision or proceeding of the Commission
   shall be deemed to be invalid by reason only of the existence
   of any vacancy in its membership or defect in the
15 appointment of any member thereof.

         10. The seal of the Commission-                             Seal of the
                                                                     Commission

         (a) shall be determined by the Commission and may
             be altered in such manner as may be determined by
             the Commission;

20       (b) shall be in the custody of such person as the
             Commission may determine from time to time; and

          (c) shall not be affixed to any instrument or document
              except with the sanction of the Commission and in
              the presence of two members of the Commission
25            who shall sign the instrument or document in token
              of their presence.
                           Online Safety                         7


                                PART II

              POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION

       11. The Commission shall have the following powers             Powers and
     and functions: -                                                 functions of
                                                                      the
                                                                      Commission
5       (a) to issue directives to persons, service providers or
            internet intermediaries, who have published or
            communicated or whose service has been used to
            communicate any prohibited statement, requiring
            them to provide to persons who have been adversely
10          affected by any prohibited statement, an
            opportunity of responding to such prohibited
            statement;

        (b) to issue notices to persons who communicate false
            statements that constitute offences under this Act,
15          to stop the communication of such statements;

        (c) to issue directives to persons who communicate
            prohibited statements under this Act, to stop the
            communication of any such statements;

        (d) to issue notices to any internet access service
20          providers or internet intermediary to disable access
            to an online location which contains a prohibited
            statement by the end users in Sri Lanka or to remove
            such prohibited statement from such online
            location;

25      (e) to refer to the appropriate court for its consideration
            any communications that may be in contempt of
            court or prejudicial to the maintenance of the
            authority and impartiality of the judiciary, and to
            provide such assistance as may be required from
30          any court in respect of any matter so referred to
            such court;
     8                      Online Safety


         (f) to make recommendations to service providers,
             internet intermediaries and internet access service
             providers to remove prohibited statements;

         (g) to maintain an online portal containing information
5            to enlighten the public of the falsity of any
             statement;

         (h) to specify declared online locations in terms of the
             provisions of this Act, and make recommendations
             to disable access to the information disseminated
10           through such online location;

         (i) to carry out such investigations and provide such
             services upon being directed by any court;

         (j) to issue codes of practice by way of rules for service
             providers and internet intermediaries who provide
15           internet based communication services to the end
             users in Sri Lanka;

         (k) to register, in such manner as may be specified
             by rules made under this Act, the websites
             providing social media platforms to the end users
20           in Sri Lanka;

         (l) to consult, to the extent the Commission considers
             appropriate, any person or group of persons who or
             which may be affected, or likely to be affected, in
             the discharge of its powers and functions;

25       (m) to advise the Government, as the Commission
             deems appropriate, on all matters concerning online
             safety in Sri Lanka, within the purview of this
             Act;
                           Online Safety                        9


        (n) to acquire and hold property movable and
            immovable, and to sell, lease, mortgage, exchange,
            or otherwise dispose of the same;

        (o) to enter into such contracts as may be necessary for
 5          the exercise, performance and discharge of its
            powers, duties and functions;

        (p) to obtain the assistance of the police in the conduct
            of any investigation undertaken by the
            Commission; and

10      (q) generally, to do all such other acts and things as are
            incidental to or consequential in the exercise,
            performance and discharge of its powers, duties and
            functions under this Act.

                              PART III

15          PROHIBITION OF ONLINE COMMUNICATION OF CERTAIN
                         STATEMENTS OF FACT


      12. Any person, whether in or outside Sri Lanka, who           Prohibition
   poses a threat to national security, public health or public      of
                                                                     communication
   order or promotes feelings of ill-will and hostility between      of false
20 different classes of people, by communicating a false             statements of
   statement, commits an offence and shall on conviction be          fact in Sri
                                                                     Lanka
   liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or
   to a fine and in the event of a second or subsequent
   conviction, such term of imprisonment or fine or both such
25 imprisonment and fine may be doubled.

        13. Any person, whether in or outside Sri Lanka who          Communication
     communicates a false statement which amounts to contempt        of false
                                                                     statement
     of court, in the opinion of any court which exercises the       amounting to
     special jurisdiction to punish the offence of contempt of       contempt
     10                       Online Safety


     court, in terms of paragraph (3) of Article 105 of the
     Constitution, commits an offence and the provisions of that
     Article and sections 18 and 55 of the Judicature Act, No.2 of
     1978 shall apply in sentencing such person.

5       14. Any person, whether in or outside Sri Lanka who              Wantonly
                                                                         giving
     maliciously or wantonly, by communicating a false
                                                                         provocation
     statement gives provocation to any person intending or              by false
                                                                         statement to
     knowing it to be likely that such provocation, will cause the       cause riot
     offence of rioting to be committed, shall, -

10        (a) if the offence of rioting be committed in
              consequence of such provocation, be liable to
              imprisonment of either description for a term not
              exceeding five years, or with fine or with both such
              imprisonment and fine; and

15        (b)    if the offence of rioting be not committed, be liable
                to imprisonment of either description for a term not
                exceeding three years, or with fine, or with both
                such imprisonment and fine.

      15. Any person, whether in or outside Sri Lanka who by             Disturbing a
                                                                         religious
20 communicating a false statement, voluntarily causes                   assembly by
   disturbance to any assembly lawfully engaged in the                   a false
                                                                         statement
   performance of religious worship or religious ceremonies,
   commits an offence and shall on conviction be liable to
   imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding
25 three years, or to a fine, or to both such imprisonment and
   fine and in the event of a second or subsequent conviction,
   such term of imprisonment or fine or both such imprisonment
   and fine may be doubled.
                            Online Safety                       11


      16. Any person, whether in or outside Sri Lanka who,            Communicating
                                                                      a false
   with the deliberate intention of wounding the religious            statement
                                                                      with
   feelings of any other person (in this section referred to as the
                                                                      deliberate
   “target person”), communicates a false statement to the target     intent to
5 person, commits an offence and shall on conviction be liable        wound
                                                                      religious
   to imprisonment of either description for a term not               feelings
   exceeding two years, or to a fine, or to both such
   imprisonment and fine and in the event of a second or
   subsequent conviction, such term of imprisonment or fine
10 or both such imprisonment and fine may be doubled.

       17. Any person, whether in or outside Sri Lanka who with       Deliberate
   the deliberate and malicious intention of outraging the            and
                                                                      malicious
   religious feelings of any class of persons, insults or attempts    communication
   to insult the religion or the religious beliefs of that class by   of false
                                                                      statement to
15 communicating a false statement, commits an offence and
                                                                      outrage
   shall on conviction be liable to imprisonment of either            religious
   description for a term not exceeding three years, or to a fine,    feelings
   or to both such imprisonment and fine and in the event of a
   second or subsequent conviction, such term of imprisonment
20 or fine or both such imprisonment and fine may be doubled.

        18. Any person, whether in or outside Sri Lanka who           Cheating
     deceives any person by communicating a false statement,
     by way of an online account or through an online location-

        (a) fraudulently or dishonestly induces the person so
25          deceived to deliver any property to any person, or
            to consent that any person shall retain any property;
            or

        (b) intentionally induces the person so deceived to do
            or omit to do anything which he would not do or
30          omit if he was not so deceived, and which act or
            omission causes or is likely to cause damage or
    12                     Online Safety


             harm to that person in body, mind, reputation, or
             property, or damage or loss to the Government,

  commits the offence of “cheating” and shall on conviction
  be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year
5 or to a fine, or to both such imprisonment and fine and in the
  event of a second or subsequent conviction, such term of
  imprisonment or fine or both such imprisonment and fine
  may be doubled.

     19. Any person, whether in or outside Sri Lanka who, by        Cheating by
   means of an online account -                                     personation
10

         (a) pretends to be some other person;

         (b) knowingly substitutes one person for another; or

         (c) represents that such person or any other person is a
             person other than the person really is,

15 commits the offence of “cheating by personation” and shall
   on conviction be liable to imprisonment of either description
   for a term not exceeding five years, or to a fine, or to both
   such imprisonment and fine and in the event of a second or
   subsequent conviction, such term of imprisonment or fine
20 or both such imprisonment and fine may be doubled.

      20. Any person, whether in or outside Sri Lanka who           Intentional
   intentionally insults by communicating a false statement,        insult by
                                                                    false
   and thereby gives provocation to any other person (in this       statement
   section referred to as the “target person”), intending or        with intent to
                                                                    provoke a
25 knowing it to be likely, that such provocation will cause        breach of
   such target person to break the public peace, or to commit       peace
   any other offence, commits an offence and shall on
   conviction be liable to imprisonment of either description
   for a term not exceeding five years, or to a fine, or to both
                           Online Safety                      13


     such imprisonment and fine and in the event of a second or
     subsequent conviction, such term of imprisonment or fine
     or both such imprisonment and fine may be doubled.

      21. Any person, whether in or outside Sri Lanka who           Circulating
                                                                    false report
 5 communicates any false statement, with intent to cause any       with intent to
   officer, sailor, soldier, or airman in the navy, army or air     cause mutiny
   force of Sri Lanka to mutiny, or with intent to cause fear or    or an offence
                                                                    against the
   alarm to the public, induces any other person to commit an
                                                                    State, & c.
   offence against the State or against the public tranquillity,
10 commits an offence and shall on conviction be liable to
   imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding
   seven years, or to a fine, or to both such imprisonment and
   fine and in the event of a second or subsequent conviction,
   such term of imprisonment or fine or both such imprisonment
15 and fine may be doubled.

      22. (1) Any person, whether in or outside Sri Lanka who       Communicating
   wilfully makes or communicates a statement of fact, with         statements of
                                                                    fact to cause
   intention to cause harassment to another person (in this         harassment &
   section referred to as the “target person”), by publishing       c.
20 any “private information” of the target person or a related
   person of the target person, and as a result causes the target
   person or any other person harassment, commits an offence
   and shall on conviction be liable to imprisonment for a term
   not exceeding five years or to a fine not exceeding five
25 hundred thousand rupees and in the event of a second or
   subsequent conviction, such term of imprisonment or fine
   or both such imprisonment and fine may be doubled.

       (2) For the purpose of this section-

        (a) “private information” means personal information,
30          including any image, audio or video details, that
            any person may reasonably expect to remain
            private, but does not include any information that
     14                        Online Safety


               may be evidence of the commission of any other
               offence; and

          (b) “harassment” means an act or behaviour which has
              the effect of threatening, alarming or distressing a
5             person or violating a person’s dignity or creating
              an intimidating, degrading, hostile, humiliating or
              offensive environment or, which has all such effects.

     Illustrations-

     (a) X and Y were formerly in a relationship which has since ended.
10        X writes a post on a social media platform including Y’s
          photographs and personal mobile number, intending to cause
          harassment to Y by facilitating the identification or enabling
          others to contact Y. Y did not see the post, but receives and is
          harassed by telephone calls and SMS messages from strangers
15        (who have read the post) propositioning Y for sex. X is guilty of
          an offence under this section in relation to such post.


     (b) X and Y were formerly in a relationship which has since ended.
          X posts a photograph of Y in the possession of X which Y could
          reasonably have expected to remain private. X is guilty of an
20        offence under this section in relation to such post.


        23. (1) Any person, whether in or outside Sri Lanka, who,             Child abuse
                                                                              &c.
     by way of an online account or through an online location-

          (a) commits or aids and abets an act which constitutes
              an offence within the meaning of section 286A, 288,
25            288A, 288B, 308A, 360A, 360B, 360C, 363, 364A,
              365, 365A or 365B of the Penal Code upon a child;
              or
                           Online Safety                      15


        (b) publishes any photograph, audio or video of
            abusive or phonographic nature relating to a child,

  commits an offence and shall on conviction be liable to
  imprisonment for a term not exceeding twenty years or to a
5 fine, or to both such imprisonment and fine and in the event
  of a second or subsequent conviction, such term of
  imprisonment or fine or both such imprisonment and fine
  may be doubled.

      (2) Where any person is convicted for an offence under
10 subsection  (1), such person shall, in addition to the penalty
   specified therein, be liable to pay such compensation as
   may be ordered by court, to the child or group of children in
   respect of whom such offence was committed.

      24. Any person, whether in or outside Sri Lanka, who          Making or
15 makes or alters a bot with the intention of communicating or     altering bots
                                                                    to commit an
   enabling any other person to communicate, by means of a          offence
   bot, a statement which constitutes an offence under this Act,
   commits an offence and shall on conviction be liable to
   imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to a fine
20 not exceeding five hundred thousand rupees and in the event
   of a second or subsequent conviction, such term of
   imprisonment or fine or both such imprisonment and fine
   may be doubled.

       25. Any person who fails to comply with any directive        Failure to
                                                                    comply with
25 issued in respect of such person by the Commission under         a directive
   paragraph (c) of section 11 within twenty four hours of its      issued by the
   receipt commits an offence and shall on conviction be liable     Commission
   to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to a
   fine not exceeding one million rupees and in the event of a
30 second or subsequent conviction, such term of imprisonment
   or fine or both such imprisonment and fine may be doubled.
    16                      Online Safety


                              PART IV

         MEASURES AGAINST COMMUNICATION OF CERTAIN STATEMENTS
                         OF FACT IN SRI LANKA


      26. (1) A person aggrieved by the communication of a         Providing
   prohibited  statement which is seen, heard or otherwise         information
 5
                                                                   to the
   perceived by the users of internet based communication          Commission
   services (in this Act referred to as the “end users”) in Sri    on
   Lanka, by any other person, may either orally, in writing or    communication
                                                                   of prohibited
   in electronic form, make a complaint providing information      statements
10 pertaining to such communication to the Commission.

      (2) The Commission shall designate such number of
   information officers from among the staff of the Commission
   as the Commission may deem necessary, from time to time,
   to receive information in relation to communication of a
15 prohibited statement for the purpose of subsection (1).

      (3)(a) Every complaint shall set out all available details
   of the person or persons responsible for the making or
   communicating the prohibited statement, including, where
   available, details pertaining to the Universal Resource
20 Locator (hereinafter referred to as the “URL”) or other
   identifying features of the location or number from which
   the prohibited statement was communicated or published,
   and such other details as may be prescribed.

      (b) Where it is possible to do so, the complainant shall
25 serve a copy of the complaint to the person or persons
   making or communicating the prohibited statement and any
   internet access service provider or internet intermediary.

      (c) In the event, the information necessary to give such
   notice as aforesaid is not available, the complainant shall
30 specify the absence of such information in the complaint.
                            Online Safety                      17


        (4) A written acknowledgement of the receipt, including
     a receipt in electronic form, of such information shall be
     immediately issued by the information officer on behalf of
     the Commission.

5       (5) Where the Commission is of the opinion that sufficient
     material exists that a prohibited statement has been
     communicated, the Commission shall carry out
     investigations through the officers of the Commission.

       (6)(a) If the Commission is satisfied, that sufficient
10 material exists that a prohibited statement has been
   communicated, it may, taking into consideration the
   seriousness of the matter and the likelihood of damage or
   prejudice caused by such prohibited statement, issue notice
   to the person who communicated such prohibited statement,
15 to take measures to prevent the circulation of such prohibited
   statement.

        (b) A person to whom a notice has been issued under
     paragraph (a) shall comply with such notice immediately
     but not later than twenty four hours from such notice.

20    (c) Notice referred to in paragraph (a), shall be deemed to
   be served, where it is served by personal service, sent by
   post to the last known address of the person who
   communicated such prohibited statement, or served by
   electronic means to such person, or served by such other
25 appropriate method adopted by the Commission depending
   on the nature of the case.

      (d) Notice referred to in paragraph (a) shall be deemed to
   be served by electronic means where such notice is sent to
   such person’s email address or social media account, or
30 internet access service provider or internet intermediary on
   whose online location such prohibited statement has been
   communicated.
     18                     Online Safety


     (7) Where any person fails to comply with a notice issued
  under subsection (6) within twenty four hours of such notice,
  the Commission shall issue a notice to the internet access
  service provider or internet intermediary on whose online
5 location such prohibited statement has been communicated-

          (a) to disable access by the end users in Sri Lanka to
              such prohibited statement; or

          (b) to remove such prohibited statement from such
              online location,

10 as the case may be, for the period specified in such notice.

        (8) The internet access service provider or internet
     intermediary to whom a notice has been issued under
     subsection (7) shall comply with such notice within twenty
     four hours from the issuance of such notice.

15      27. (1) Any person affected by the communication of any       Applying for
     prohibited statement may apply to the Magistrate’s Court         a court order
     by way of petition and affidavit to obtain an order to prevent   to prevent
                                                                      circulation of
     the circulation of such information.                             prohibited
                                                                      statements
      (2) Upon considering such application, the Magistrate
20 may  issue a conditional order to such person or the internet
   access service provider or internet intermediary on whose
   online location such prohibited statement has been
   communicated.

      (3) The order made under subsection (2) may contain,
25 inter alia-

          (a) the name of the person who is required to stop
              communication of the prohibited statement with
              immediate effect; and

          (b) any other order as the Magistrate deems fit.
                           Online Safety                     19


     (4) (a) The order made under subsection (2) shall be
  deemed to be served, where it is served by personal service,
  sent by post to the last known address of such person, or
  served by electronic means to such person, or by such other
5 appropriate method ordered by the Magistrate depending
  on the nature of the case.

      (b) The order made under subsection (2) shall be deemed
   to be served by electronic means where such order is sent to
   such person’s email address or social media account, or
10 internet access service provider or internet intermediary on
   whose online location such prohibited statement has been
   communicated.

       (5) The person against whom a conditional order is made
   under subsection (2) shall either comply with such order or
15 appear before the Magistrate as specified in subsection (6)
   to show cause as to why the order shall not be made absolute.

      (6) Where the person against whom a conditional order is
   made under subsection (2) intends to show cause, such person
   shall appear before the Magistrate making that order within
20 a period of one week of making such order and move to have
   the order set aside or modified in the manner hereinafter
   provided.

      (7) If the person against whom an order is made under
   subsection (2) neither complies with the order nor appears
25 before the Magistrate under subsection (6), such person shall
   be liable to the penalty specified in subsection (9) and the
   order shall be made absolute.

       (8) (a) Where such person appears before the Magistrate
   in terms of subsection (6), to show cause by way of petition
30 and affidavit, the Magistrate shall hold an inquiry which
   shall be concluded within two weeks of the date of
   commencement of the inquiry.
     20                      Online Safety


     (b) The Magistrate may, having regard to the facts stated
  by the person against whom the conditional order is made
  under subsection (2), either move to have the order set aside
  or modified, if the Magistrate is satisfied that the order made
5 under this section is not reasonable and proper, and make an
  appropriate order subject to the provisions of this Act.

       (c) If the Magistrate is not so satisfied, the order made
     under subsection (2) shall be made absolute.

      (d) Where the order under subsection (2) is modified under
10 paragraph (b), such order shall be made absolute.

       (9) (a) Where the person against whom any order is made
   under this section fails to comply with such order within the
   period and in the manner ordered by the Magistrate, such
   person commits an offence and shall on conviction be liable
15 to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to a
   fine not exceeding two million rupees and the Magistrate
   may order the Commission to take steps to -

          (i) disable access by end users in Sri Lanka to the online
              location containing such communication of the
20            statement of fact in Sri Lanka; or

          (ii) remove the relevant communication of the
               prohibited statement in Sri Lanka from the online
               location containing such communication.

      (b) Where the offence under paragraph (a) is a continuing
25 offence, such person shall be liable to an additional fine of
   five hundred thousand rupees for each day during which
   such offence is continued.
                            Online Safety                       21


     28. (1) Where any person is aggrieved by the                     Disclosure of
                                                                      identity
  communication of a prohibited statement and the                     information
  information necessary to serve a copy of the complaint under
  subsection (3) of section 26 is not available, such person
5 shall specify the absence of such information in the complaint
  made under subsection (1) of section 26.

      (2) In the event of the receipt of a complaint referred to in
   subsection (1), the Commission shall file a petition with the
   Magistrate’s Court seeking a conditional order directing
10 the internet intermediary on whose online location such
   prohibited statement was communicated, to disclose the
   information regarding the identity of the person who
   communicated the prohibited statement.

       (3) The Magistrate may upon being satisfied that –

15      (a) the statement was a prohibited statement;

        (b) the order is sought for the sole purpose of
            identifying the person who communicated such
            prohibited statement; and

        (c) the order is a proportionate and necessary response
20          in all of the circumstances of the matter before the
            Court, taking into consideration whether the
            petitioner’s right to disclosure of the information is
            outweighed by any countervailing right or interest
            of the person sought to be identified,

25 issue the order sought by the Commission.
    22                     Online Safety


       (4) The order made under subsection (3) may contain,
    inter alia-

         (a) the name of the internet intermediary which is
             required to disclose the information sought; and

5        (b) any other order as the Magistrate deems fit.

      (5) (a) The order made under subsection (3) shall be
   deemed to be served, where it is served by personal service,
   sent by post to the last known address of the internet
   intermediary, or served by electronic means to such internet
10 intermediary, or by such other appropriate method ordered
   by the Magistrate depending on the nature of the case.

      (b) The order made under subsection (3) shall be deemed
   to be served by electronic means where such order is sent to
   the email address or social media account, of the internet
15 intermediary on whose online location such prohibited
   statement has been communicated.

      (6) The internet intermediary against whom a conditional
   order is made under subsection (3) shall either comply with
   such order or appear before the Magistrate as specified in
20 subsection (7) to show cause as to why the order shall not be
   made absolute.

      (7) Where the internet intermediary against whom a
   conditional order is made under subsection (3) intends to
   show cause, it shall appear before the Magistrate making
25 that order within a period of one week of making such order
   and move to have the order set aside or modified in the
   manner hereinafter provided.
                            Online Safety                       23


     (8) If the internet intermediary against whom an order is
  made under subsection (3) neither complies with the order
  nor appears before the Magistrate under subsection (7), it
  shall be liable to the penalty specified in subsection (10)
5 and the order shall be made absolute.

      (9) (a) Where such internet intermediary appears before
   the court in terms of subsection (7) to show cause by way of
   petition and affidavit, the Magistrate shall hold an inquiry
   which shall be concluded within two weeks of the date of
10 commencement of the inquiry.

      (b) The Magistrate may, having regard to the facts stated
   by the internet intermediary against whom the conditional
   order is made under subsection (3), either move to have the
   order set aside or modified, if the Magistrate is satisfied that
15 the order under this section is not reasonable and proper,
   make an appropriate order subject to the provisions of this
   Act.

       (c) If the Magistrate is not so satisfied, the order made
     under subsection (3) shall be made absolute.

20     (d) Where the order under subsection (3) is modified
     under paragraph (b), such order shall be made absolute.

      (10) (a) Where the internet intermediary against whom
   any order is made under this section fails to comply with
   such order within the period and in the manner ordered by
25 the Magistrate, such person shall be liable to a penalty not
   exceeding ten million rupees.

      (b) Where the offence under paragraph (a) is a continuing
   offence, such internet intermediary shall be liable to an
   additional fine of one million rupees for each day during
30 which such offence is continued.
     24                       Online Safety


     29. (1) Any person who is aggrieved by the                          Aggrieved
                                                                         person to
  communication of a prohibited statement may, by way of a               seek
  civil action, apply for an order directing the internet                disclosure of
  intermediary of the online location on which such prohibited           identity
                                                                         information
5 statement communicated to disclose any information
  regarding the identity or the location of the person who
  used such online location to communicate such statement
  using the inauthentic online account or bot.

      (2) Upon the receipt of an application under subsection
10 (1), the court may, if-

          (a) the prohibited statement was communicated by a
              person whose identity cannot be traced by the
              person who is aggrieved by such statement;

          (b) the internet intermediary against whom the order is
15            sought was involved in the communication of such
              statement whether innocently or not;

          (c) the information sought is necessary for the
              aggrieved person to initiate legal proceedings to
              seek redress in relation to the damage caused by
20            the communication of such statement; and

          (d) the aggrieved person’s right to get such information
              disclosed is outweighed by any countervailing
              right or interest of the person sought to be identified,

   order an internet intermediary to disclose the information as
25 requested by the aggrieved person.

        30. Where a person who engages in providing the                  Liability of
     following services fails to adhere to the relevant code of          service
                                                                         providers in
     practice issued by the Commission by way of rules made              relation to
     under this Act, and thereby causes wrongful loss to any other       communication
                            Online Safety                      25


     person, such person shall be liable to pay damages by way
     of compensation to the person who suffered the loss: -
        (a) an internet intermediary service;
        (b) a telecommunication service;
5        (c) a service of giving public access to the internet; or
        (d) a computer resource service.

      31. (1) Subject to the provisions of any other written law     Exemption
   and the provisions of subsection (2), a person who engages        from liability
                                                                     of service
   in providing the following services shall have no liability
                                                                     providers in
10 in relation to the communication of a prohibited statement        certain cases
   circulated through the online location owned, operated or
   controlled by such person, or for making available to the
   end users through such online location a communication
   link which contains any prohibited statement by any other
15 party, which amounts to an offence under this Act or for any
   compensation payable for any wrongful loss caused to any
   person by such communication:-

        (a) an internet intermediary service;
        (b) a telecommunication service;
20       (c) a service of giving public access to the internet; or
        (d) a computer resource service.

        (2) The exemption from liability granted under subsection
     (1) shall not apply, if such person –

        (a) has initiated the communication;
25      (b) has selected the end user of the communication;
         (c) has selected or modified the content of the
             communication; or
        (d) has not complied with the provisions of this Act
            and any regulation or rule made thereunder, in
30          providing the service.
     26                       Online Safety


                                 PART V

                       DECLARED ONLINE LOCATIONS

        32. (1) The Commission may declare an online location             Declared
     as a “declared online location”, if-                                 online
                                                                          locations

5         (a) three or more different prohibited statements have
              been or are being communicated to the end users in
              Sri Lanka on such online location which have been
              held to be a prohibited statement by the Magistrate’s
              Court; and

10        (b) at least three of such statements had first been
              communicated to the end users in Sri Lanka on
              such online location within six months prior to the
              date of a declaration under this section is made.

      (2) For the purposes of paragraph (a) of subsection (1), a
15 statement is different from another if it is different in a material
   particular from that other statement.

          (3) A declaration made under this section shall contain-

          (a) the URL, domain name, or any other unique
              identifier of the online location;

20        (b) the relevant orders made by the Magistrate’s Court;

           (c) the date on which the declaration comes into effect;

          (d) the date on which the declaration expires or a
              formula by which that date may be worked out,
              which must not be later than two years after the
25            date referred to in paragraph (c);
                             Online Safety                      27


         (e) a notice for the owner or operator of the online
             location whether in or outside Sri Lanka to
             communicate in such manner as may be specified
             in the declaration, to any end user in Sri Lanka who
5            accesses the online location, a notice in such form
             as may be specified in such declaration, that the
             online location is the subject of a declaration; and

         (f) such other particulars as may be prescribed.

        (4) A declaration made under this section may expire-

10       (a) on the date specified therein, or worked out in
             accordance with paragraph (d) of subsection (3); or

         (b) on the date it is cancelled or set aside by the
             Commission,

     whichever is earlier.

15      (5) As soon as possible after a declaration is made and
     before the date it comes into effect, the Commission shall-

         (a) publish, in such form and manner as may be
             prescribed, a notice in the Gazette -

                   (i) stating that a declaration has been issued
20                     under this section; and

                  (ii) setting out the URL, domain name, or any
                       other unique identifier of the online
                       location, to which the declaration relates;
                       and

25       (b) make reasonable efforts to serve a copy of the
             declaration to the owner or operator of the declared
             online location.
     28                      Online Safety


     (6) (a) The declaration shall be deemed to be served, if
  the declaration is served by personal service, sent by post to
  the last known address of such owner or operator of the
  online location, or served by electronic means to such
5 person, or by such other appropriate method adopted by the
  Commission, depending on the nature of the case.

      (b) The declaration shall be deemed to be served by
   electronic means where such declaration is sent to the email
   address or social media account of the owner or operator of
10 the online location through which such prohibited statement
   has been communicated.

      (7) Where any owner or operator of a declared online
   location fails to comply with the notice to communicate a
   notice as referred to in paragraph (e) of subsection (3), the
15 Commission or any person authorised by the Commission
   may apply to the Magistrate for an order directing owner or
   operator to-

          (a) disable access by the end users in Sri Lanka to such
              declared online location;

20        (b) to communicate to all end users in Sri Lanka who
              access such declared online location, a notice
              declaring that the online location is the subject of a
              declaration; and

          (c) any other order as the Magistrate deems fit.

25      (8) Upon considering such application, the Magistrate
     may make a conditional order on the owner or operator of a
     declared online location containing the directions applied
     by the Commission under subsection (7).
                           Online Safety                       29


        (9) The order made under subsection (8) may contain,
     inter alia-

        (a) the name of the owner or operator of a declared
            online location who is required to disable access
5           by the end users in Sri Lanka to the declared online
            location;

        (b) the manner of communicating the notice referred
            to in paragraph (e) of subsection (3); and

        (c) the period within which such notice shall be
10          published after the service of the order.

      (10) The order made under subsection (8) shall be deemed
   to be served on the owner or operator of a declared online
   location against whom the order is made, if the order is served
   by personal service, sent by registered post to the last known
15 address of such person, or served by electronic means to
   such person, or by any other method deemed proper by the
   Magistrate depending on the nature of the case and in
   accordance with the provisions of this Act.

      (11) The owner or operator of a declared online location
20 against whom a conditional order is made under subsection
   (8) shall either comply with such order or appear before the
   Magistrate as specified in subsection (12) to show cause as
   to why the order shall not be made absolute.

      (12) Where the owner or operator of a declared online
25 location  against whom a conditional order is made under
   subsection (8) intends to show cause, such person shall appear
   before the Magistrate making that order within a period of
   one week of making such order and move to have the order
   set aside or modified in the manner hereinafter provided:
    30                      Online Safety


     Provided however, any owner or operator of a declared
  online location against whom a conditional order is made
  under subsection (8) shall be bound to comply with the order
  with effect from the date of making such order until such
5 order is set aside or modified by the Magistrate in terms of
  the provisions of this section.

      (13) If the owner or operator of a declared online location
   against whom an order is made under subsection (8) neither
   complies with the order nor appears before the Magistrate
10 under subsection (12) such person shall be liable to the
   penalty specified in subsection (15) and the order shall be
   made absolute.

      (14) (a) Where such owner or operator of a declared online
   location appears before the Magistrate in terms of subsection
15 (12) to show cause by way of petition and affidavit, the
   Magistrate shall hold an inquiry which shall be concluded
   within two weeks of the date of commencement of the
   inquiry.

      (b) The Magistrate may, having regard to the facts stated
20 by the owner or operator of a declared online location against
   whom the conditional order is made under subsection (8),
   either move to have the order set aside or modified, if the
   Magistrate is satisfied that the order under this section is not
   reasonable and proper, and make an appropriate order, subject
25 to the provisions of this Act.

      (c) If the Magistrate is not so satisfied, the order made
    under subsection (8) shall be made absolute.

       (d) Where the order under subsection (8) is modified under
    paragraph (b), such order shall be made absolute.
                            Online Safety                       31


       (15) (a) Where the owner or operator of a declared online
   location against whom the order is made under this section
   fails to comply with such order within the period and in the
   manner ordered by the Magistrate’s Court, such owner or
 5 operator of a declared online location commits an offence
   and shall on conviction be liable to imprisonment for a term
   not exceeding six years or to a fine not exceeding rupees ten
   million and Magistrate’s Court may make an order directing
   the Commission to take steps to disable access by the end
10 users in Sri Lanka to the declared online location.

        (b) Where the offence under paragraph (a) is a continuing
     offence, such owner or operator of a declared online location
     shall be liable to an additional fine of five hundred thousand
     rupees for each day during which such offence is continued.

15      (16) The Commission may at any time suspend, vary or
     cancel a declaration made under this section for such period
     as the Commission may determine-

         (a) on its own initiative; or

         (b) on an application by-

20                 (i) the owner or operator of the declared
                       online location; or

                  (ii) any person with editorial control over the
                       online location.

      (17) For the purpose of subsection (16), a person has
25 “editorial control over an online location” if the person is
   able to decide-

         (a) whether any statement may be included or excluded
             on the online location; or

         (b) where to place any statement on the online location.
     32                      Online Safety


        (18) Upon a declaration being suspended, varied or
     cancelled under subsection (16), the Commission shall-

          (a) publish, in such form and manner as may be
              prescribed, a notice of the suspension, variation or
5             cancellation in the Gazette; and

          (b) make reasonable efforts to give a copy of such notice
              to the owner or operator of the declared online
              location.

      33. (1) A service provider must take reasonable steps (both     Certain
10 in and outside Sri Lanka) to ensure that, after a prescribed       persons not
                                                                      to
   period commencing on the date a declaration made under             communicate
   section 32 comes into effect, any paid content that it includes    in Sri Lanka,
                                                                      paid content
   or causes to be included on a declared online location, is not     on declared
   communicated in Sri Lanka on the declared online location.         online
                                                                      locations,
                                                                      &c.
15    (2) A digital advertising intermediary must take
   reasonable steps (both in and outside Sri Lanka) to ensure
   that, after a prescribed period commencing on the date a
   declaration made under section 32 comes into effect, any
   paid content that it includes or causes to be included on a
20 declared online location is not communicated in Sri Lanka
   on the declared online location.

      (3) A digital advertising intermediary or an internet
   intermediary must take reasonable steps (both in and outside
   Sri Lanka) to ensure that, after a prescribed period
25 commencing on the date on the declaration made under
   section 32 comes into effect, it does not, when acting as a
   digital advertising intermediary or an internet intermediary,
   facilitate the communication in Sri Lanka of any paid content
   that gives publicity to, or otherwise promotes, a declared
30 online location.
                           Online Safety                      33


     (4) A service provider or digital advertising intermediary
  shall be treated for the purposes of subsection (1) or (2), as
  the case may be, as having taken reasonable steps to ensure
  that any paid content that it includes or causes to be included
5 on a declared online location is not communicated in Sri
  Lanka on the declared online location, if it has taken such
  steps as may be prescribed by regulations.

      (5) A digital advertising intermediary or an internet
   intermediary is treated for the purposes of subsection (3), as
10 having taken reasonable steps to ensure that it does not
   facilitate the communication in Sri Lanka of any paid content
   mentioned in that subsection if it has taken such steps as
   may be prescribed by regulations.

      (6) A person who fails to comply with the provisions of
15 subsection (1), (2) or (3) commits an offence and shall on
   conviction be liable to imprisonment for a term not
   exceeding seven years or to a fine not exceeding ten million
   rupees and in the event of a second or subsequent conviction,
   such term of imprisonment or fine or both such imprisonment
20 and fine may be doubled.

      34. (1) Any person, whether in or outside Sri Lanka, who      Prohibition
   solicits, receives or agrees to receive any financial or other   on deriving
                                                                    benefits from
   material benefit as an inducement or reward for operating a      operating a
   declared online location commits an offence and shall on         declared
25 conviction be liable to imprisonment for a term not              online
                                                                    location
   exceeding five years or to a fine not exceeding five million
   rupees and in the event of a second or subsequent conviction,
   such term of imprisonment or fine or both such imprisonment
   and fine may be doubled.

30      (2) Where a court convicts any person of an offence under
     this section, the court shall order, in addition to imposing
     on that person the punishment in subsection (1), the
     forfeiture of any assets acquired through the commission of
     an offence under this section.
    34                     Online Safety


      35. (1) A person, whether in or outside Sri Lanka, who        Prohibition
                                                                    on providing
   expends or applies any property knowing or having reason         financial
   to believe that the expenditure or application supports, helps   support to
                                                                    declared
   or promotes the communication of prohibited statements to        online
 5 the end users in Sri Lanka on a declared online location         locations

   commits an offence and shall on conviction be liable to
   imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to a fine
   not exceeding five million rupees and in the event of a second
   or subsequent conviction, such term of imprisonment or fine
10 or both such imprisonment and fine may be doubled.

      (2) The provisions of subsection (1) shall not apply to a
   service provider or a digital advertising intermediary which
   gives any consideration for the purpose of communicating
   any paid content in Sri Lanka on the declared online
15 location.

      (3) Where a court convicts any person of an offence under
   this section, the court shall order, in addition to imposing
   on that person the punishment in subsection (1), the
   forfeiture of any property acquired through expending or
20 applying any property by the commission of an offence under
   this section.

      (4) For the purpose of this section, “property” means
   money and all other property, movable or immovable,
   including things in action and other intangible or
25 incorporeal property.
                            Online Safety                       35


                              PART VI

           COUNTERACTING INAUTHENTIC   ONLINE ACCOUNTS AND
                  COORDINATED INAUTHENTIC BEHAVIOUR


     36. (1) If the conditions in subsection (2) are satisfied, the   Counteracting
5 Commission may issue a notice in writing to an internet             inauthentic
                                                                      online
  intermediary, requiring it to do one or both of the following,      accounts and
  for the period specified in such notice: -                          coordinated
                                                                      inauthentic
                                                                      behaviour
        (a) to refrain from permitting its services from being
            used to communicate any prohibited statement in
10          Sri Lanka through one or more specified online
            accounts; or

        (b) to refrain from permitting any person from using
            one or more specified online accounts to interact
            with any end user of its internet intermediary service
15          in Sri Lanka.

        (2) The conditions referred to in subsection (1) shall be,
     as follows:-

        (a) such online account or accounts shall have been
            created with the internet intermediary in respect of
20          which the notice under subsection (1) is issued;

        (b) either a prohibited statement has been
            communicated in Sri Lanka using the specified
            online account or coordinated inauthentic
            behaviour has been carried out in Sri Lanka using
25          the specified online account; and

         (c) the Commission has determined that the online
             account is an inauthentic online account or is
             controlled by a bot.
     36                     Online Safety


     (3) The notice shall be deemed to be served on the internet
  intermediary, if it is served by personal service, sent by post
  to the last known address of such internet intermediary, or
  served by electronic means to such person, or by any other
5 method deemed proper by the Commission depending on
  the nature of the case.

      (4) Where a notice issued under subsection (1) has not
   been complied with, the Commission shall submit an
   application to the Magistrate’s Court. Upon considering such
10 application the Magistrate may issue a conditional order on
   the internet intermediary containing the directions applied
   for by the Commission under subsection (1).

         (5) An Order made under subsection (4) shall specify that
     it has effect-

15        (a) indefinitely; or

          (b) for a specified period not exceeding three months.

      (6) The order made under subsection (4) shall be deemed
   to be served on the internet intermediary against whom the
   order is made, if the order is served by personal service, sent
20 by registered post to the last known address of such person,
   or served by electronic means to such person, or by any
   other method deemed proper by the Magistrate depending
   on the nature of the case and in accordance with the
   provisions of this Act.

25      (7) The internet intermediary against whom a conditional
     order is made under subsection (4) shall either comply with
     such order or appear before the Magistrate as specified in
     subsection (8) to show cause as to why the order shall not be
     made absolute.
                            Online Safety                       37


     (8) Where the internet intermediary against whom a
  conditional order is made under subsection (4) intends to
  show cause, it shall appear before the Magistrate making
  that order, within a period of one week of making such order
5 and move to have the order set aside or modified in the
  manner hereinafter provided:

      Provided however, any internet intermediary against
   whom a conditional order is made under subsection (4) shall
   be bound to comply with the order with effect from the date
10 of making such order until such order is set aside or modified
   by the Magistrate in terms of the provisions of this section.

      (9) If the internet intermediary against whom an order is
   made under subsection (4) neither complies with the order
   nor appears before the Magistrate under subsection (8) he
15 shall be liable to the penalty specified in subsection (11)
   and the order shall be made absolute.

      (10) (a) Where such internet intermediary appears before
   the Magistrate in terms of subsection (8) to show cause by
   way of petition and affidavit, the Magistrate shall hold an
20 inquiry which shall be concluded within two weeks of the
   date of commencement of the inquiry.

      (b) The Magistrate may having regard to the facts stated
   by the internet intermediary against whom the conditional
   order is made under subsection (4), either move to have the
25 order set aside or modified, if the Magistrate is satisfied that
   the order under this section is not reasonable and proper,
   make an appropriate order subject to the provisions of this
   Act.

     (c) If the Magistrate is not so satisfied, the order made
30 under subsection (4) shall be made absolute.

       (d) Where the order under subsection (4) is modified under
    paragraph (b), such order shall be made absolute.
     38                     Online Safety


      (11) (a) Where the internet intermediary against whom
   the order is made under this section fails to comply with
   such order within the period and in the manner ordered by
   the Magistrate, such person commits an offence and shall on
 5 conviction be liable to imprisonment for a term not
   exceeding seven years or to a fine not exceeding ten million
   rupees, and the Magistrate may make an order directing the
   Commission to take steps to enforce such order by preventing
   access to the prohibited statement within Sri Lanka,
10 notwithstanding anything contrary in any other law.

        (b) Where the offence under paragraph (a) is a continuing
     offence, such internet intermediary shall be liable to an
     additional fine of five hundred thousand rupees for each
     day during which such offence is continued.

15                            PART VII

          APPOINTMENT OF EXPERTS TO ASSIST INVESTIGATIONS AND
                             THEIR POWERS


       37. (1) Where the court deems necessary, the Minister         Appointment
   may by Order published in the Gazette appoint a person, an        of experts to
                                                                     assist
20 institution or a body of persons having the specified             investigations
   qualifications and experience in information technology
   (hereinafter referred to as “an expert”), to assist any police
   officer in any investigation in respect of an offence under
   this Act.

25      (2) The Order made by the Minister under subsection (1)
     shall specify the qualifications of experts in various fields
     of expertise in information technology and the manner and
     mode of appointment and the conditions of appointment of
     such experts.

30      (3) It shall be the duty of an expert to render all such
     assistance as may be required for the purposes of such
     investigation.
                             Online Safety                       39


        (4) An expert may, for the purpose of an investigation
     under this Act, under the authority of a warrant issued in that
     behalf by a Magistrate on application made for such purpose
     by a police officer not below the rank of a sub-inspector-

5        (a) enter upon any premises along with a police officer
             not below the rank of a sub-inspector; and

         (b) access any information system, computer or
             computer system or any programme, data or
             information held in such computer and to cause
10           any computer to perform any function or to do any
             such other thing.

      (5) For the purposes of an investigation under this Act, an
   expert who has been called upon to assist the police may,
   with the authority granted by a police officer not below the
15 rank of sub-inspector-

         (a) require any person to produce any document,
             information, device or other thing as is necessary
             for the purpose of such investigation;

         (b) require any person to disclose any traffic data;

20       (c) orally examine any person; and

         (d) do such other things as may be reasonably required,
             for the purposes of this Act.

      (6) Where any proceedings have been commenced
   consequent to the findings of an investigation, it shall be
25 the duty of the expert to make available for the purposes of
   such proceedings, any information, data, material or other
   matter that may be obtained by such person in the course of
   such investigation.
     40                     Online Safety


     (7) Any information, data, material or other matter made
  available by an expert under subsection (6) shall be
  admissible in evidence in relation to the prosecution in
  respect of any offence under this Act and shall be prima
5 facie proof of the facts stated therein.

        (8) An expert shall be paid such remuneration as may be
     determined by the Minister in consultation with the Minister
     assigned the subject of Finance.

      38. Any person who is required by an expert, under the        Duty to assis
                                                                    tinvestigations
10 authority  of a police officer, to make any disclosure or to
   assist in an investigation in respect of an offence under this
   Act shall comply with such requirement.

      39. (1) An expert who assists a police officer, for an        Powers of
   investigation in respect of an offence under this Act, under     search and
                                                                    seizure with
15 the authority of a warrant issued in that behalf by a            warrant
   Magistrate, on application made for such purpose by the
   police officer, may, -

          (a) obtain any information including subscriber
              information and traffic data in the possession of
20            any service provider; or

          (b) intercept any wire or electronic communication
              including subscriber information and traffic data,
              at any stage of such communication.

      (2) The Minister may, by regulations prescribe the manner
25 in which, and the procedures required to be followed in
   respect of, the retention and interception of data and
   information including traffic data, for the purposes of any
   investigation in respect of an offence under this Act.
                           Online Safety                      41


                             PART VIII

                               FINANCE

       40. (1) The Commission shall have its own Fund.              Fund of the
                                                                    Commission

      (2) There shall be credited to the Fund of the Commission
5 all such sums of money as may be voted from time to time by
  Parliament for the use of the Commission.

      (3) All sums of money required to defray expenditure
   incurred by the Commission in the exercise and performance
   of its duties and functions under this Act, shall be paid out
10 of the Fund of the Commission, and such other expenditure
   to be charged on the Fund in terms of this Act.

       (4) The Commission shall cause proper accounts to be
     kept of the receipts and expenditure, assets and liabilities
     and all other transactions of the Commission.

15      (5) The financial year of the Commission shall be the
     calendar year.

      41. The provisions of Article 154 of the Constitution         Audit of
                                                                    accounts
   relating to the audit of the accounts of public corporations
   shall apply to and in relation to the audit of the accounts of
20 the Fund of the Commission.

                              PART IX

                               GENERAL

      42. Save as expressly provided in this Act, the provisions    Provisions of
   of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979,           the Code of
                                                                    Criminal
25 shall, mutatis mutandis apply to investigations, the trial of
                                                                    Procedure
   offences and to appeals from judgements, sentences and           Act to apply
   orders pronounced at any such trial under this Act.
     42                     Online Safety


        43. (1) The jurisdiction to hear, try and determine all      Jurisdiction
     offences under this Act shall be vested with the Magistrate’s
     Court.

     (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in subsection
5 (1), where there are aggravating circumstances or
  circumstances that give rise to public disquiet in connection
  with the commission of an offence, it shall be lawful for the
  Attorney General to forward indictment directly to the High
  Court.

10    44. Any person who attempts to commit an offence under         Attempt to
   this Act or to cause such an offence to be committed, commits     commit an
                                                                     offence
   an offence and shall on conviction be liable to imprisonment
   of either description for a term not exceeding one half of the
   maximum term provided for each of such offences or to a
15 fine not exceeding one half of the maximum fine provided
   for each of such offences or to both such imprisonment and
   fine.

      45. (1) A person who attempts to commit or to cause the        Abetment of
   commission of an offence under this Act and in such attempt       an offence

20 does any act towards the commission of that offence commits
   an offence and shall be tried in the same manner, and shall
   on conviction be liable to the same punishment, as is
   prescribed by this Act for the first-mentioned offence.

      (2) A person who abets an offence under this Act commits
25 an offence and shall be tried in the same manner, and shall
   on conviction be liable to the same punishment, as is
   prescribed by this Act for the first-mentioned offence. In this
   subsection the expression “abet” shall have the same
   meaning as in sections 100 and 101 of the Penal Code.

30     46. A person who conspires with any other person to           Conspiring to
                                                                     commit an
     commit an offence under this Act commits an offence and         offence
                           Online Safety                     43


  shall be tried in the same manner and shall on conviction be
  liable to the same punishment as is prescribed by this Act for
  the first-mentioned offence. In this section, the expression
  “conspire” shall have the same meaning as in section 113A
5 of the Penal Code.

       47. Every offence under this Act shall be –                 Offences
                                                                   under this
                                                                   Act to be
                                                                   non-
        (a) a non-cognizable offence within the meaning of         cognizable
            and for the purposes of the Code of Criminal           and bailable
            Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979; and

10      (b) a bailable offence within the meaning of the Bail
            Act, No. 30 of 1997.

       48. Where an offence under this Act is committed by a       Offences by
     body of persons, then, if that body of persons is-            body of
                                                                   persons

        (a) a body corporate, every director, or other principal
15          officer of that body corporate;

        (b) a firm, every partner of that firm; and

        (c) an unincorporated body, every individual who is a
            controlling member of such body and every
            principal officer of that body responsible for its
20          management and control,

     commits an offence:

       Provided however, that no such person shall be deemed
   to have commited an offence if he proves that the offence
   was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised
25 all due diligence to prevent the commission of the offence.
     44                       Online Safety


          49. (1) A suit or prosecution shall not lie against-      Protection
                                                                    from action

          (a) the Commission for any act which in good faith is
              done or omitted to be done, by the Commission
              under this Act; or

5         (b) any member, staff of the Commission or an expert
              appointed under section 37 for any act which in
              good faith is done or omitted to be done, by such
              person under this Act or any other Act.

      (2) Any expenses incurred by the Commission in any suit
10 or prosecution brought by, or against, the Commission before
   any court, shall be paid out of the Fund of the Commission
   and any costs paid to, or recovered by, the Commission in
   any such suit or prosecution, shall be credited to the Fund of
   the Commission.

15     (3) Any expenses incurred by any member, staff of the
   Commission or an expert assisting the Commission, in any
   suit or prosecution brought against such person in any court
   in respect of any act which is done, or purported to be done,
   by such person under this Act or on the direction of the
20 Commission shall, if the court holds that the act was done in
   good faith, be paid out of the Fund of the Commission, unless
   such expense is recovered by such person in such suit or
   prosecution.

      50. (1) The Commission shall within three months of the       Annual
                                                                    reports of the
25 end of each financial year, prepare a report of its activities   Commission
   during that year and its proposed activities in the following
   year, and shall transmit a copy of such report together with a
   copy of the audited accounts of the Commission for that
   year, to the Minister.
                           Online Safety                      45


        (2) The Minister on receipt of a report prepared under
     subsection (1)-

        (a) shall cause a copy of such report to be placed before
            Parliament;

5       (b) may require the members of the Commission to
            clarify any matter arising from such report to
            Parliament or a Committee of Parliament; and

         (c) may require the Commission to publish such report
             and accounts in such manner as the Commission
10           considers appropriate to bring them to the attention
             of the public.

        (3) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1)
     every annual report shall contain-

        (a) a general survey of developments during the year
15          to which the report relates in respect of matters
            falling within the scope of the Commission’s
            function and in particular, ensuring online safety;
            and

        (b) details of the measures taken by the Commission to
20          ensure online safety during that year.

        51. All members and staff of the Commission shall be        Members and
     deemed to be public servants within the meaning and for the    staff of the
                                                                    Commission
     purposes of the Penal Code.                                    deemed to be
                                                                    public
                                                                    servants


      52. The Commission shall be deemed to be a scheduled          Commission
25 institution within the meaning of the Bribery Act,               deemed to
                                                                    be a
   Anti-Corruption Act, No. 9 of 2023, and the provisions of        scheduled
   that Act shall be construed accordingly.                         institution
                                                                    for the
                                                                    purpose of
                                                                    the Anti-
                                                                    Corruption
                                                                    Act
     46                      Online Safety


        53. (1) The Commission shall make rules for the purpose       Commission
                                                                      to make rules
     of the following matters:-

          (a) to issue the codes of practice applicable for service
              providers and internet intermediaries who provide
5             internet based communication services, specifying
              security practices and procedures required to be
              followed by them; and

          (b) to specify the manner in which the websites
              providing social media platforms to the end users
10            in Sri Lanka shall be registered under this Act.

        (2) The Commission shall make the first rules under
     subsection (1), within twenty four months from the date of
     commencement of this Act.

      (3) The Commission shall, prior to making rules under
15 subsection (1), hold public consultations for a period of not
   less than two weeks.

        (4) The period of public consultation referred to in
     subsection (3) may be extended for a further period as may
     be specified by the Commission.

20      (5) Every rule made under subsection (1) shall be
     published in the Gazette and shall come into operation on
     the date of publication or on such later date as may be
     specified therein.

      (6) Every rule made under subsection (1) shall, within
25 three months from the date of its publication in the Gazette,
   be placed before Parliament for approval.
                            Online Safety                        47


         54. (1) The Minister may make regulations in respect of      Regulations
     all matters which are required by this Act to be prescribed or
     in respect of which regulations are required or authorized to
     be made under this Act.

5       (2) Every regulation made under subsection (1) shall be
     published in the Gazette and shall come into operation on
     the date of publication or on such later date as may be
     specified therein.

      (3) Every regulation made under subsection (1) shall,
10 within three months from the date of its publication in the
   Gazette, be placed before Parliament for approval. Every
   regulation which is not so approved shall be deemed to be
   rescinded as from the date of disapproval, but without
   prejudice to anything previously done thereunder.

15      (4) Notification of the date on which any regulation
     is deemed to be so rescinded shall be published in the
     Gazette.

      55. In the event of any inconsistency or conflict between       This Act to
                                                                      prevail over
   the provisions of this Act and any other written law, the
                                                                      other written
20 provisions of this Act shall prevail.                              law

        56. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires–        Interpretation


           “bot” means a computer program made or altered for
             the purpose of running automated tasks;

           “Chairman” includes the Deputy Chairman appointed
25           under subsection (6) of section 8;

           “child” means a person under the age of eighteen years;
     48                   Online Safety


          “coordinated inauthentic behaviour” means any
            coordinated activity carried out using two or more
            online accounts, in order to mislead the end users
            in Sri Lanka of any internet intermediary service
5           as to any matter, but excludes any activity carried
            out using online accounts-

              (a) that are controlled by the same person; and

              (b) none of which is an inauthentic online
                  account or is controlled by a bot;

10        “communicate” means communicating to one or more
             end users in Sri Lanka on or through the internet a
             statement of fact or private information and
             includes transmitting, distributing, sharing,
             generating, propagating, publishing or tagging and
15           the term “communication” shall be construed
             accordingly;

          “computer” means an electronic or similar device
             having information processing capabilities;

          “computer system” means a computer or group of
20           inter-connected computers, including the internet;

          “declared online location” means an online location
             declared under Section 32;

          “digital advertising intermediary” means any person
             who, in the ordinary course of business, facilitates
25           the communication of paid content in any place
             by acting as the link or part of the link between-

              (a) the owners or operators of online locations;
                  and

              (b) advertisers and service providers, by means
30                of an internet based service;
                      Online Safety                      49


     “fact” includes anything or state of things which are
        seen, heard or otherwise perceived by the users of
        internet based communication services;

     “false statement” means a statement that is known or
5       believed by its maker to be incorrect or untrue and
        is made especially with intent to deceive or mislead
        but does not include a caution, an opinion or
        imputation made in good faith;

     “inauthentic online account” means an online account
10      that is controlled by a person other than the person
        represented (whether by its user, unique identifier
        or other information) as its holder, and the
        representation is made for the purpose of misleading
        the end users in Sri Lanka of any internet
15      intermediary service as to the holder’s identity;

     “internet access service provider” means an entity
        offering the transmission, routing, or providing of
        connections for digital online communications,
        between or among points specified by a user, of
20      material of the user’s choosing, without
        modification to the content of the material as sent
        or received;

     “internet intermediary” means a person who provides
        any internet intermediary service;

25   “internet intermediary service” means-

         (a) a service that allows end users to access
             materials originating from third parties on or
             through the internet;

         (b) a service of transmitting such materials to end
30           users on or through the internet; or
     50                    Online Safety


              (c) a service of displaying, to an end user who
                  uses the service to make an online search, an
                  index of search results, each of which links
                  that end user to content hosted or stored at a
5                 location which is separate from the location
                  of the index of search results,

             but excludes any act done for the purpose of, or
             that is incidental to, the provision of a service of
             giving the public access to the internet or a
10           computing resource service;

          “material” means anything that consists of or contains
            a statement;

          “Minister” means the Minister to whom the function
            of administering the provisions of this Act is
15          assigned in terms of Article 44 or 45 of the
            Constitution;

          “online account” means an account created with an
            internet intermediary for the use of an internet
            intermediary service;

20        “online location” means any website, webpage,
            chatroom or forum, or any other thing that is hosted
            on a computer and can be seen, heard or otherwise
            perceived by means of the internet;

          “paid content” means any statement that is
25          communicated in any place upon payment of a
            consideration;

          “Penal Code” means the Penal Code (Chapter 19);

          “person” means a natural or legal person;

          “prescribe” means prescribe by regulations;
                            Online Safety                       51


           “prohibited statement” means a statement specified in
              section 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 ,21, 22 or
              23;

           “service provider” means any person other than a
5             digital advertising intermediary who, in the ordinary
              course of business, provides advisory or other
              services relating to the communication of paid
              content in any place;

           “social media platform” means a service provided by
10            an internet intermediary-

                 (a) solely for the purpose of enabling online
                    social interaction between two or more end
                    users in Sri Lanka;

                 (b) which allows end users in Sri Lanka to link
15                  to some or all of the other end users; or

                 (c) which allows the end users in Sri Lanka to
                    post material on the service,

              but does not include any such service of which any
              information communicated through the service is
20            not accessible by the end users in Sri Lanka;

           “statement” means any word including abbreviation
              and initial, number, image (moving or otherwise),
              sound, symbol or other representation, or a
              combination of any of these.

25     57. In the event of any inconsistency between the Sinhala      Sinhala text
     and Tamil texts of this Act, the Sinhala text shall prevail.     to prevail in
                                                                      case of
                                                                      inconsistency
52     Online Safety




     DEPARTMENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING
