PART I

            ESTABLISHMENT OF THE ONLINE SAFETY COMMISSION

      4. (1) There shall be established a Commission, which          Establishment
                                                                     of the Online
   shall be called the Online Safety Commission (hereinafter         Safety
15 referred to as the “Commission”).                                 Commission


        (2) The Commission shall, by the name assigned to it by
     subsection (1), be a body corporate with perpetual succession
     and a common seal, and may sue and be sued in such name.

      (3) The Commission shall exercise and perform the powers
20 and functions assigned to it under this Act for the purpose of
   achieving the objectives of this Act.

      5. Subject to the provisions of section 6, the Commission      Members of
                                                                     the
   shall consist of five members appointed by the President
                                                                     Commission
   having qualifications and experience in one or more of the
25 fields of information technology, law, governance, social
   services, journalism, science and technology or management.
                            Online Safety                       3


        6. A person shall be disqualified from being appointed       Disqualification
     or continuing as a member of the Commission if such person-     for being
                                                                     appointed as
                                                                     a member
        (a) is elected or appointed as a Member of Parliament,
            a Member of a Provincial Council or a Member of a
5           local authority;

        (b) is not or ceases to be a citizen of Sri Lanka;

         (c) directly or indirectly holds or enjoys an entitlement
             or benefit under an agreement entered by or on
             behalf of the Commission;

10      (d) has any financial or other interest that may adversely
            impact the implementation of the functions as a
            member of the Commission;

         (e) absents himself from attending three consecutive
             meetings of the Commission, without a valid reason;

15       (f) has been discovered or declared as a person of
             unsound mind under any law effective in Sri Lanka
             or in any other country;

        (g) a person who, having been declared an insolvent or
            a bankrupt under any law in Sri Lanka or in any
20          other country, is an undischarged insolvent or
            bankrupt; or

        (h) has been sentenced or received an order for a term
            of imprisonment imposed by any court in Sri Lanka
            or in any other country.

25      7. (1) A member of the Commission may resign from office     Resignation,
     by letter in that behalf addressed to the President, and such   removal and
                                                                     term of
     resignation shall take effect from the date on which the        office of
     resignation is accepted in writing by the President.            members of
                                                                     the
                                                                     Commission
     4                     Online Safety


       (2) The President may, for reasons assigned, remove a
     member of the Commission from his office.

        (3) The term of office of a member of the Commission
     shall be three years from the date of appointment.

 5    (4) Where a member of the Commission vacates office
   by death, resignation or other cause, the President shall
   appoint, having regard to the provisions of sections 5 and 6,
   another eligible person in such members’ place, and the
   person so appointed shall hold office for the unexpired period
10 of the term of office of the member whom such person
   succeeds.

      (5) A member of the Commission whose term of office is
   due to end otherwise than by removal, shall be eligible for
   reappointment for not more than one further term of office,
15 whether consecutive or otherwise.

        (6) Members of the Commission shall be paid such
     remuneration as may be determined by a resolution of
     Parliament and such remuneration shall be charged to the
     Fund of the Commission.

20      8. (1) The President shall appoint one of the members of    Chairman of
     the Commission to be the Chairman of the Commission            the
                                                                    Commission
     (hereinafter referred to as the “Chairman”).

      (2) The Chairman may resign from the office of Chairman
   by letter in that behalf addressed to the President and the
25 resignation shall take effect from the date on which it is
   accepted, in writing, by the President.

        (3) The Chairman shall cease to be the Chairman, if
     disqualified to be a member of the Commission in terms of
     section 6.
                             Online Safety                        5


        (4) The term of office of the Chairman shall be three years.

       (5) The Chairman shall not, on vacation of the office of
     Chairman, be eligible for reappointment as Chairman.

     (6) Without prejudice to the provisions of this section,
5 the Chairman shall, within one month of being appointed as
  the Chairman, nominate a member in writing, to be the
  Deputy Chairman to discharge the functions of the Chairman
  during his absence from office due to illness or any other
  cause.

10     9. (1) The Chairman shall summon all meetings of the            Meetings of
     Commission. Any member of the Commission may, by                  the
                                                                       Commission
     written notice, request the Chairman to call a meeting of the
     Commission and the Chairman shall not otherwise than for
     good reason, refuse to do so.

15      (2) The Commission may decide any matter, which is
     determined by the Chairman to be urgent with the agreement
     of the majority of the members.

     (3) The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the
   Commission and in the absence of the Chairman at any
20 meeting, the Deputy Chairman shall preside at such meeting.

        (4) The quorum for a meeting of the Commission shall be
     three members including the Chairman. In the absence of
     the Chairman, the quorum shall be three members including
     the Deputy Chairman.

25    (5) All matters for decision by the Commission shall be
   decided by a majority of the votes of the members of the
   Commission. The decision supported by the votes of a
   majority of the members of the Commission on any matter
   shall be deemed to be the decision of the Commission on
30 that matter.
     6                      Online Safety


        (6) All decisions of the Commission, supported by
     reasons, shall be in writing and the seal of the Commission
     affixed thereto in accordance with paragraph (c) of section
     10.

5       (7) In case there is an equality of votes on any matter to
     be decided by the Commission, the Chairman shall have a
     casting vote.

      (8) Subject to the preceding provisions of this section,
   the Commission may regulate the procedure in regard to the
10 meetings of the Commission and the transaction of business
   at such meetings.

      (9) No act, decision or proceeding of the Commission
   shall be deemed to be invalid by reason only of the existence
   of any vacancy in its membership or defect in the
15 appointment of any member thereof.

         10. The seal of the Commission-                             Seal of the
                                                                     Commission

         (a) shall be determined by the Commission and may
             be altered in such manner as may be determined by
             the Commission;

20       (b) shall be in the custody of such person as the
             Commission may determine from time to time; and

          (c) shall not be affixed to any instrument or document
              except with the sanction of the Commission and in
              the presence of two members of the Commission
25            who shall sign the instrument or document in token
              of their presence.
                           Online Safety                         7


                                