PART VII

          APPOINTMENT OF EXPERTS TO ASSIST INVESTIGATIONS AND
                             THEIR POWERS


       37. (1) Where the court deems necessary, the Minister         Appointment
   may by Order published in the Gazette appoint a person, an        of experts to
                                                                     assist
20 institution or a body of persons having the specified             investigations
   qualifications and experience in information technology
   (hereinafter referred to as “an expert”), to assist any police
   officer in any investigation in respect of an offence under
   this Act.

25      (2) The Order made by the Minister under subsection (1)
     shall specify the qualifications of experts in various fields
     of expertise in information technology and the manner and
     mode of appointment and the conditions of appointment of
     such experts.

30      (3) It shall be the duty of an expert to render all such
     assistance as may be required for the purposes of such
     investigation.
                             Online Safety                       39


        (4) An expert may, for the purpose of an investigation
     under this Act, under the authority of a warrant issued in that
     behalf by a Magistrate on application made for such purpose
     by a police officer not below the rank of a sub-inspector-

5        (a) enter upon any premises along with a police officer
             not below the rank of a sub-inspector; and

         (b) access any information system, computer or
             computer system or any programme, data or
             information held in such computer and to cause
10           any computer to perform any function or to do any
             such other thing.

      (5) For the purposes of an investigation under this Act, an
   expert who has been called upon to assist the police may,
   with the authority granted by a police officer not below the
15 rank of sub-inspector-

         (a) require any person to produce any document,
             information, device or other thing as is necessary
             for the purpose of such investigation;

         (b) require any person to disclose any traffic data;

20       (c) orally examine any person; and

         (d) do such other things as may be reasonably required,
             for the purposes of this Act.

      (6) Where any proceedings have been commenced
   consequent to the findings of an investigation, it shall be
25 the duty of the expert to make available for the purposes of
   such proceedings, any information, data, material or other
   matter that may be obtained by such person in the course of
   such investigation.
     40                     Online Safety


     (7) Any information, data, material or other matter made
  available by an expert under subsection (6) shall be
  admissible in evidence in relation to the prosecution in
  respect of any offence under this Act and shall be prima
5 facie proof of the facts stated therein.

        (8) An expert shall be paid such remuneration as may be
     determined by the Minister in consultation with the Minister
     assigned the subject of Finance.

      38. Any person who is required by an expert, under the        Duty to assis
                                                                    tinvestigations
10 authority  of a police officer, to make any disclosure or to
   assist in an investigation in respect of an offence under this
   Act shall comply with such requirement.

      39. (1) An expert who assists a police officer, for an        Powers of
   investigation in respect of an offence under this Act, under     search and
                                                                    seizure with
15 the authority of a warrant issued in that behalf by a            warrant
   Magistrate, on application made for such purpose by the
   police officer, may, -

          (a) obtain any information including subscriber
              information and traffic data in the possession of
20            any service provider; or

          (b) intercept any wire or electronic communication
              including subscriber information and traffic data,
              at any stage of such communication.

      (2) The Minister may, by regulations prescribe the manner
25 in which, and the procedures required to be followed in
   respect of, the retention and interception of data and
   information including traffic data, for the purposes of any
   investigation in respect of an offence under this Act.
                           Online Safety                      41


                             