PART IX

                               GENERAL

      42. Save as expressly provided in this Act, the provisions    Provisions of
   of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979,           the Code of
                                                                    Criminal
25 shall, mutatis mutandis apply to investigations, the trial of
                                                                    Procedure
   offences and to appeals from judgements, sentences and           Act to apply
   orders pronounced at any such trial under this Act.
     42                     Online Safety


        43. (1) The jurisdiction to hear, try and determine all      Jurisdiction
     offences under this Act shall be vested with the Magistrate’s
     Court.

     (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in subsection
5 (1), where there are aggravating circumstances or
  circumstances that give rise to public disquiet in connection
  with the commission of an offence, it shall be lawful for the
  Attorney General to forward indictment directly to the High
  Court.

10    44. Any person who attempts to commit an offence under         Attempt to
   this Act or to cause such an offence to be committed, commits     commit an
                                                                     offence
   an offence and shall on conviction be liable to imprisonment
   of either description for a term not exceeding one half of the
   maximum term provided for each of such offences or to a
15 fine not exceeding one half of the maximum fine provided
   for each of such offences or to both such imprisonment and
   fine.

      45. (1) A person who attempts to commit or to cause the        Abetment of
   commission of an offence under this Act and in such attempt       an offence

20 does any act towards the commission of that offence commits
   an offence and shall be tried in the same manner, and shall
   on conviction be liable to the same punishment, as is
   prescribed by this Act for the first-mentioned offence.

      (2) A person who abets an offence under this Act commits
25 an offence and shall be tried in the same manner, and shall
   on conviction be liable to the same punishment, as is
   prescribed by this Act for the first-mentioned offence. In this
   subsection the expression “abet” shall have the same
   meaning as in sections 100 and 101 of the Penal Code.

30     46. A person who conspires with any other person to           Conspiring to
                                                                     commit an
     commit an offence under this Act commits an offence and         offence
                           Online Safety                     43


  shall be tried in the same manner and shall on conviction be
  liable to the same punishment as is prescribed by this Act for
  the first-mentioned offence. In this section, the expression
  “conspire” shall have the same meaning as in section 113A
5 of the Penal Code.

       47. Every offence under this Act shall be –                 Offences
                                                                   under this
                                                                   Act to be
                                                                   non-
        (a) a non-cognizable offence within the meaning of         cognizable
            and for the purposes of the Code of Criminal           and bailable
            Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979; and

10      (b) a bailable offence within the meaning of the Bail
            Act, No. 30 of 1997.

       48. Where an offence under this Act is committed by a       Offences by
     body of persons, then, if that body of persons is-            body of
                                                                   persons

        (a) a body corporate, every director, or other principal
15          officer of that body corporate;

        (b) a firm, every partner of that firm; and

        (c) an unincorporated body, every individual who is a
            controlling member of such body and every
            principal officer of that body responsible for its
20          management and control,

     commits an offence:

       Provided however, that no such person shall be deemed
   to have commited an offence if he proves that the offence
   was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised
25 all due diligence to prevent the commission of the offence.
     44                       Online Safety


          49. (1) A suit or prosecution shall not lie against-      Protection
                                                                    from action

          (a) the Commission for any act which in good faith is
              done or omitted to be done, by the Commission
              under this Act; or

5         (b) any member, staff of the Commission or an expert
              appointed under section 37 for any act which in
              good faith is done or omitted to be done, by such
              person under this Act or any other Act.

      (2) Any expenses incurred by the Commission in any suit
10 or prosecution brought by, or against, the Commission before
   any court, shall be paid out of the Fund of the Commission
   and any costs paid to, or recovered by, the Commission in
   any such suit or prosecution, shall be credited to the Fund of
   the Commission.

15     (3) Any expenses incurred by any member, staff of the
   Commission or an expert assisting the Commission, in any
   suit or prosecution brought against such person in any court
   in respect of any act which is done, or purported to be done,
   by such person under this Act or on the direction of the
20 Commission shall, if the court holds that the act was done in
   good faith, be paid out of the Fund of the Commission, unless
   such expense is recovered by such person in such suit or
   prosecution.

      50. (1) The Commission shall within three months of the       Annual
                                                                    reports of the
25 end of each financial year, prepare a report of its activities   Commission
   during that year and its proposed activities in the following
   year, and shall transmit a copy of such report together with a
   copy of the audited accounts of the Commission for that
   year, to the Minister.
                           Online Safety                      45


        (2) The Minister on receipt of a report prepared under
     subsection (1)-

        (a) shall cause a copy of such report to be placed before
            Parliament;

5       (b) may require the members of the Commission to
            clarify any matter arising from such report to
            Parliament or a Committee of Parliament; and

         (c) may require the Commission to publish such report
             and accounts in such manner as the Commission
10           considers appropriate to bring them to the attention
             of the public.

        (3) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1)
     every annual report shall contain-

        (a) a general survey of developments during the year
15          to which the report relates in respect of matters
            falling within the scope of the Commission’s
            function and in particular, ensuring online safety;
            and

        (b) details of the measures taken by the Commission to
20          ensure online safety during that year.

        51. All members and staff of the Commission shall be        Members and
     deemed to be public servants within the meaning and for the    staff of the
                                                                    Commission
     purposes of the Penal Code.                                    deemed to be
                                                                    public
                                                                    servants


      52. The Commission shall be deemed to be a scheduled          Commission
25 institution within the meaning of the Bribery Act,               deemed to
                                                                    be a
   Anti-Corruption Act, No. 9 of 2023, and the provisions of        scheduled
   that Act shall be construed accordingly.                         institution
                                                                    for the
                                                                    purpose of
                                                                    the Anti-
                                                                    Corruption
                                                                    Act
     46                      Online Safety


        53. (1) The Commission shall make rules for the purpose       Commission
                                                                      to make rules
     of the following matters:-

          (a) to issue the codes of practice applicable for service
              providers and internet intermediaries who provide
5             internet based communication services, specifying
              security practices and procedures required to be
              followed by them; and

          (b) to specify the manner in which the websites
              providing social media platforms to the end users
10            in Sri Lanka shall be registered under this Act.

        (2) The Commission shall make the first rules under
     subsection (1), within twenty four months from the date of
     commencement of this Act.

      (3) The Commission shall, prior to making rules under
15 subsection (1), hold public consultations for a period of not
   less than two weeks.

        (4) The period of public consultation referred to in
     subsection (3) may be extended for a further period as may
     be specified by the Commission.

20      (5) Every rule made under subsection (1) shall be
     published in the Gazette and shall come into operation on
     the date of publication or on such later date as may be
     specified therein.

      (6) Every rule made under subsection (1) shall, within
25 three months from the date of its publication in the Gazette,
   be placed before Parliament for approval.
                            Online Safety                        47


         54. (1) The Minister may make regulations in respect of      Regulations
     all matters which are required by this Act to be prescribed or
     in respect of which regulations are required or authorized to
     be made under this Act.

5       (2) Every regulation made under subsection (1) shall be
     published in the Gazette and shall come into operation on
     the date of publication or on such later date as may be
     specified therein.

      (3) Every regulation made under subsection (1) shall,
10 within three months from the date of its publication in the
   Gazette, be placed before Parliament for approval. Every
   regulation which is not so approved shall be deemed to be
   rescinded as from the date of disapproval, but without
   prejudice to anything previously done thereunder.

15      (4) Notification of the date on which any regulation
     is deemed to be so rescinded shall be published in the
     Gazette.

      55. In the event of any inconsistency or conflict between       This Act to
                                                                      prevail over
   the provisions of this Act and any other written law, the
                                                                      other written
20 provisions of this Act shall prevail.                              law

        56. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires–        Interpretation


           “bot” means a computer program made or altered for
             the purpose of running automated tasks;

           “Chairman” includes the Deputy Chairman appointed
25           under subsection (6) of section 8;

           “child” means a person under the age of eighteen years;
     48                   Online Safety


          “coordinated inauthentic behaviour” means any
            coordinated activity carried out using two or more
            online accounts, in order to mislead the end users
            in Sri Lanka of any internet intermediary service
5           as to any matter, but excludes any activity carried
            out using online accounts-

              (a) that are controlled by the same person; and

              (b) none of which is an inauthentic online
                  account or is controlled by a bot;

10        “communicate” means communicating to one or more
             end users in Sri Lanka on or through the internet a
             statement of fact or private information and
             includes transmitting, distributing, sharing,
             generating, propagating, publishing or tagging and
15           the term “communication” shall be construed
             accordingly;

          “computer” means an electronic or similar device
             having information processing capabilities;

          “computer system” means a computer or group of
20           inter-connected computers, including the internet;

          “declared online location” means an online location
             declared under Section 32;

          “digital advertising intermediary” means any person
             who, in the ordinary course of business, facilitates
25           the communication of paid content in any place
             by acting as the link or part of the link between-

              (a) the owners or operators of online locations;
                  and

              (b) advertisers and service providers, by means
30                of an internet based service;
                      Online Safety                      49


     “fact” includes anything or state of things which are
        seen, heard or otherwise perceived by the users of
        internet based communication services;

     “false statement” means a statement that is known or
5       believed by its maker to be incorrect or untrue and
        is made especially with intent to deceive or mislead
        but does not include a caution, an opinion or
        imputation made in good faith;

     “inauthentic online account” means an online account
10      that is controlled by a person other than the person
        represented (whether by its user, unique identifier
        or other information) as its holder, and the
        representation is made for the purpose of misleading
        the end users in Sri Lanka of any internet
15      intermediary service as to the holder’s identity;

     “internet access service provider” means an entity
        offering the transmission, routing, or providing of
        connections for digital online communications,
        between or among points specified by a user, of
20      material of the user’s choosing, without
        modification to the content of the material as sent
        or received;

     “internet intermediary” means a person who provides
        any internet intermediary service;

25   “internet intermediary service” means-

         (a) a service that allows end users to access
             materials originating from third parties on or
             through the internet;

         (b) a service of transmitting such materials to end
30           users on or through the internet; or
     50                    Online Safety


              (c) a service of displaying, to an end user who
                  uses the service to make an online search, an
                  index of search results, each of which links
                  that end user to content hosted or stored at a
5                 location which is separate from the location
                  of the index of search results,

             but excludes any act done for the purpose of, or
             that is incidental to, the provision of a service of
             giving the public access to the internet or a
10           computing resource service;

          “material” means anything that consists of or contains
            a statement;

          “Minister” means the Minister to whom the function
            of administering the provisions of this Act is
15          assigned in terms of Article 44 or 45 of the
            Constitution;

          “online account” means an account created with an
            internet intermediary for the use of an internet
            intermediary service;

20        “online location” means any website, webpage,
            chatroom or forum, or any other thing that is hosted
            on a computer and can be seen, heard or otherwise
            perceived by means of the internet;

          “paid content” means any statement that is
25          communicated in any place upon payment of a
            consideration;

          “Penal Code” means the Penal Code (Chapter 19);

          “person” means a natural or legal person;

          “prescribe” means prescribe by regulations;
                            Online Safety                       51


           “prohibited statement” means a statement specified in
              section 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 ,21, 22 or
              23;

           “service provider” means any person other than a
5             digital advertising intermediary who, in the ordinary
              course of business, provides advisory or other
              services relating to the communication of paid
              content in any place;

           “social media platform” means a service provided by
10            an internet intermediary-

                 (a) solely for the purpose of enabling online
                    social interaction between two or more end
                    users in Sri Lanka;

                 (b) which allows end users in Sri Lanka to link
15                  to some or all of the other end users; or

                 (c) which allows the end users in Sri Lanka to
                    post material on the service,

              but does not include any such service of which any
              information communicated through the service is
20            not accessible by the end users in Sri Lanka;

           “statement” means any word including abbreviation
              and initial, number, image (moving or otherwise),
              sound, symbol or other representation, or a
              combination of any of these.

25     57. In the event of any inconsistency between the Sinhala      Sinhala text
     and Tamil texts of this Act, the Sinhala text shall prevail.     to prevail in
                                                                      case of
                                                                      inconsistency
52     Online Safety




     DEPARTMENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING
