PART IV

         MEASURES AGAINST COMMUNICATION OF CERTAIN STATEMENTS
                         OF FACT IN SRI LANKA


      26. (1) A person aggrieved by the communication of a         Providing
   prohibited  statement which is seen, heard or otherwise         information
 5
                                                                   to the
   perceived by the users of internet based communication          Commission
   services (in this Act referred to as the “end users”) in Sri    on
   Lanka, by any other person, may either orally, in writing or    communication
                                                                   of prohibited
   in electronic form, make a complaint providing information      statements
10 pertaining to such communication to the Commission.

      (2) The Commission shall designate such number of
   information officers from among the staff of the Commission
   as the Commission may deem necessary, from time to time,
   to receive information in relation to communication of a
15 prohibited statement for the purpose of subsection (1).

      (3)(a) Every complaint shall set out all available details
   of the person or persons responsible for the making or
   communicating the prohibited statement, including, where
   available, details pertaining to the Universal Resource
20 Locator (hereinafter referred to as the “URL”) or other
   identifying features of the location or number from which
   the prohibited statement was communicated or published,
   and such other details as may be prescribed.

      (b) Where it is possible to do so, the complainant shall
25 serve a copy of the complaint to the person or persons
   making or communicating the prohibited statement and any
   internet access service provider or internet intermediary.

      (c) In the event, the information necessary to give such
   notice as aforesaid is not available, the complainant shall
30 specify the absence of such information in the complaint.
                            Online Safety                      17


        (4) A written acknowledgement of the receipt, including
     a receipt in electronic form, of such information shall be
     immediately issued by the information officer on behalf of
     the Commission.

5       (5) Where the Commission is of the opinion that sufficient
     material exists that a prohibited statement has been
     communicated, the Commission shall carry out
     investigations through the officers of the Commission.

       (6)(a) If the Commission is satisfied, that sufficient
10 material exists that a prohibited statement has been
   communicated, it may, taking into consideration the
   seriousness of the matter and the likelihood of damage or
   prejudice caused by such prohibited statement, issue notice
   to the person who communicated such prohibited statement,
15 to take measures to prevent the circulation of such prohibited
   statement.

        (b) A person to whom a notice has been issued under
     paragraph (a) shall comply with such notice immediately
     but not later than twenty four hours from such notice.

20    (c) Notice referred to in paragraph (a), shall be deemed to
   be served, where it is served by personal service, sent by
   post to the last known address of the person who
   communicated such prohibited statement, or served by
   electronic means to such person, or served by such other
25 appropriate method adopted by the Commission depending
   on the nature of the case.

      (d) Notice referred to in paragraph (a) shall be deemed to
   be served by electronic means where such notice is sent to
   such person’s email address or social media account, or
30 internet access service provider or internet intermediary on
   whose online location such prohibited statement has been
   communicated.
     18                     Online Safety


     (7) Where any person fails to comply with a notice issued
  under subsection (6) within twenty four hours of such notice,
  the Commission shall issue a notice to the internet access
  service provider or internet intermediary on whose online
5 location such prohibited statement has been communicated-

          (a) to disable access by the end users in Sri Lanka to
              such prohibited statement; or

          (b) to remove such prohibited statement from such
              online location,

10 as the case may be, for the period specified in such notice.

        (8) The internet access service provider or internet
     intermediary to whom a notice has been issued under
     subsection (7) shall comply with such notice within twenty
     four hours from the issuance of such notice.

15      27. (1) Any person affected by the communication of any       Applying for
     prohibited statement may apply to the Magistrate’s Court         a court order
     by way of petition and affidavit to obtain an order to prevent   to prevent
                                                                      circulation of
     the circulation of such information.                             prohibited
                                                                      statements
      (2) Upon considering such application, the Magistrate
20 may  issue a conditional order to such person or the internet
   access service provider or internet intermediary on whose
   online location such prohibited statement has been
   communicated.

      (3) The order made under subsection (2) may contain,
25 inter alia-

          (a) the name of the person who is required to stop
              communication of the prohibited statement with
              immediate effect; and

          (b) any other order as the Magistrate deems fit.
                           Online Safety                     19


     (4) (a) The order made under subsection (2) shall be
  deemed to be served, where it is served by personal service,
  sent by post to the last known address of such person, or
  served by electronic means to such person, or by such other
5 appropriate method ordered by the Magistrate depending
  on the nature of the case.

      (b) The order made under subsection (2) shall be deemed
   to be served by electronic means where such order is sent to
   such person’s email address or social media account, or
10 internet access service provider or internet intermediary on
   whose online location such prohibited statement has been
   communicated.

       (5) The person against whom a conditional order is made
   under subsection (2) shall either comply with such order or
15 appear before the Magistrate as specified in subsection (6)
   to show cause as to why the order shall not be made absolute.

      (6) Where the person against whom a conditional order is
   made under subsection (2) intends to show cause, such person
   shall appear before the Magistrate making that order within
20 a period of one week of making such order and move to have
   the order set aside or modified in the manner hereinafter
   provided.

      (7) If the person against whom an order is made under
   subsection (2) neither complies with the order nor appears
25 before the Magistrate under subsection (6), such person shall
   be liable to the penalty specified in subsection (9) and the
   order shall be made absolute.

       (8) (a) Where such person appears before the Magistrate
   in terms of subsection (6), to show cause by way of petition
30 and affidavit, the Magistrate shall hold an inquiry which
   shall be concluded within two weeks of the date of
   commencement of the inquiry.
     20                      Online Safety


     (b) The Magistrate may, having regard to the facts stated
  by the person against whom the conditional order is made
  under subsection (2), either move to have the order set aside
  or modified, if the Magistrate is satisfied that the order made
5 under this section is not reasonable and proper, and make an
  appropriate order subject to the provisions of this Act.

       (c) If the Magistrate is not so satisfied, the order made
     under subsection (2) shall be made absolute.

      (d) Where the order under subsection (2) is modified under
10 paragraph (b), such order shall be made absolute.

       (9) (a) Where the person against whom any order is made
   under this section fails to comply with such order within the
   period and in the manner ordered by the Magistrate, such
   person commits an offence and shall on conviction be liable
15 to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to a
   fine not exceeding two million rupees and the Magistrate
   may order the Commission to take steps to -

          (i) disable access by end users in Sri Lanka to the online
              location containing such communication of the
20            statement of fact in Sri Lanka; or

          (ii) remove the relevant communication of the
               prohibited statement in Sri Lanka from the online
               location containing such communication.

      (b) Where the offence under paragraph (a) is a continuing
25 offence, such person shall be liable to an additional fine of
   five hundred thousand rupees for each day during which
   such offence is continued.
                            Online Safety                       21


     28. (1) Where any person is aggrieved by the                     Disclosure of
                                                                      identity
  communication of a prohibited statement and the                     information
  information necessary to serve a copy of the complaint under
  subsection (3) of section 26 is not available, such person
5 shall specify the absence of such information in the complaint
  made under subsection (1) of section 26.

      (2) In the event of the receipt of a complaint referred to in
   subsection (1), the Commission shall file a petition with the
   Magistrate’s Court seeking a conditional order directing
10 the internet intermediary on whose online location such
   prohibited statement was communicated, to disclose the
   information regarding the identity of the person who
   communicated the prohibited statement.

       (3) The Magistrate may upon being satisfied that –

15      (a) the statement was a prohibited statement;

        (b) the order is sought for the sole purpose of
            identifying the person who communicated such
            prohibited statement; and

        (c) the order is a proportionate and necessary response
20          in all of the circumstances of the matter before the
            Court, taking into consideration whether the
            petitioner’s right to disclosure of the information is
            outweighed by any countervailing right or interest
            of the person sought to be identified,

25 issue the order sought by the Commission.
    22                     Online Safety


       (4) The order made under subsection (3) may contain,
    inter alia-

         (a) the name of the internet intermediary which is
             required to disclose the information sought; and

5        (b) any other order as the Magistrate deems fit.

      (5) (a) The order made under subsection (3) shall be
   deemed to be served, where it is served by personal service,
   sent by post to the last known address of the internet
   intermediary, or served by electronic means to such internet
10 intermediary, or by such other appropriate method ordered
   by the Magistrate depending on the nature of the case.

      (b) The order made under subsection (3) shall be deemed
   to be served by electronic means where such order is sent to
   the email address or social media account, of the internet
15 intermediary on whose online location such prohibited
   statement has been communicated.

      (6) The internet intermediary against whom a conditional
   order is made under subsection (3) shall either comply with
   such order or appear before the Magistrate as specified in
20 subsection (7) to show cause as to why the order shall not be
   made absolute.

      (7) Where the internet intermediary against whom a
   conditional order is made under subsection (3) intends to
   show cause, it shall appear before the Magistrate making
25 that order within a period of one week of making such order
   and move to have the order set aside or modified in the
   manner hereinafter provided.
                            Online Safety                       23


     (8) If the internet intermediary against whom an order is
  made under subsection (3) neither complies with the order
  nor appears before the Magistrate under subsection (7), it
  shall be liable to the penalty specified in subsection (10)
5 and the order shall be made absolute.

      (9) (a) Where such internet intermediary appears before
   the court in terms of subsection (7) to show cause by way of
   petition and affidavit, the Magistrate shall hold an inquiry
   which shall be concluded within two weeks of the date of
10 commencement of the inquiry.

      (b) The Magistrate may, having regard to the facts stated
   by the internet intermediary against whom the conditional
   order is made under subsection (3), either move to have the
   order set aside or modified, if the Magistrate is satisfied that
15 the order under this section is not reasonable and proper,
   make an appropriate order subject to the provisions of this
   Act.

       (c) If the Magistrate is not so satisfied, the order made
     under subsection (3) shall be made absolute.

20     (d) Where the order under subsection (3) is modified
     under paragraph (b), such order shall be made absolute.

      (10) (a) Where the internet intermediary against whom
   any order is made under this section fails to comply with
   such order within the period and in the manner ordered by
25 the Magistrate, such person shall be liable to a penalty not
   exceeding ten million rupees.

      (b) Where the offence under paragraph (a) is a continuing
   offence, such internet intermediary shall be liable to an
   additional fine of one million rupees for each day during
30 which such offence is continued.
     24                       Online Safety


     29. (1) Any person who is aggrieved by the                          Aggrieved
                                                                         person to
  communication of a prohibited statement may, by way of a               seek
  civil action, apply for an order directing the internet                disclosure of
  intermediary of the online location on which such prohibited           identity
                                                                         information
5 statement communicated to disclose any information
  regarding the identity or the location of the person who
  used such online location to communicate such statement
  using the inauthentic online account or bot.

      (2) Upon the receipt of an application under subsection
10 (1), the court may, if-

          (a) the prohibited statement was communicated by a
              person whose identity cannot be traced by the
              person who is aggrieved by such statement;

          (b) the internet intermediary against whom the order is
15            sought was involved in the communication of such
              statement whether innocently or not;

          (c) the information sought is necessary for the
              aggrieved person to initiate legal proceedings to
              seek redress in relation to the damage caused by
20            the communication of such statement; and

          (d) the aggrieved person’s right to get such information
              disclosed is outweighed by any countervailing
              right or interest of the person sought to be identified,

   order an internet intermediary to disclose the information as
25 requested by the aggrieved person.

        30. Where a person who engages in providing the                  Liability of
     following services fails to adhere to the relevant code of          service
                                                                         providers in
     practice issued by the Commission by way of rules made              relation to
     under this Act, and thereby causes wrongful loss to any other       communication
                            Online Safety                      25


     person, such person shall be liable to pay damages by way
     of compensation to the person who suffered the loss: -
        (a) an internet intermediary service;
        (b) a telecommunication service;
5        (c) a service of giving public access to the internet; or
        (d) a computer resource service.

      31. (1) Subject to the provisions of any other written law     Exemption
   and the provisions of subsection (2), a person who engages        from liability
                                                                     of service
   in providing the following services shall have no liability
                                                                     providers in
10 in relation to the communication of a prohibited statement        certain cases
   circulated through the online location owned, operated or
   controlled by such person, or for making available to the
   end users through such online location a communication
   link which contains any prohibited statement by any other
15 party, which amounts to an offence under this Act or for any
   compensation payable for any wrongful loss caused to any
   person by such communication:-

        (a) an internet intermediary service;
        (b) a telecommunication service;
20       (c) a service of giving public access to the internet; or
        (d) a computer resource service.

        (2) The exemption from liability granted under subsection
     (1) shall not apply, if such person –

        (a) has initiated the communication;
25      (b) has selected the end user of the communication;
         (c) has selected or modified the content of the
             communication; or
        (d) has not complied with the provisions of this Act
            and any regulation or rule made thereunder, in
30          providing the service.
     26                       Online Safety


                                 